add base merge p2p spec (#2531)
ethereum/eth2.0-specs: specs/merge/p2p-interface.md

<!-- /TOC -->

## Warning

This document is currently illustrative for early Merge testnets and some parts are subject to change.
Refer to the note in the [validator guide](./validator.md) for further details.

# Modifications in the Merge

## The gossip domain: gossipsub

Some gossip meshes are upgraded in the Merge to support upgraded types.

### Topics and messages

Topics follow the same specification as in prior upgrades.
All topics remain stable except the beacon block topic which is updated with the modified type.

The specification around the creation, validation, and dissemination of messages has not changed from the Phase 0 and Altair documents.

The derivation of the `message-id` remains stable.

The new topics along with the type of the `data` field of a gossipsub message are given in this table:

| Name | Message Type |
| - | - |
| `beacon_block` | `SignedBeaconBlock` (modified) |

Note that the `ForkDigestValue` path segment of the topic separates the old and the new `beacon_block` topics.

#### Global topics

The Merge changes the type of the global beacon block topic.

##### `beacon_block`

> The existing specification for this topic does not change from prior upgrades,

Reviewer: I think we can introduce additional gossip topic validation steps, to filter bad execution-payloads, without requiring any execution-layer storage:
- [reject] Check `gas_used <= gas_limit`
- [reject] Check `gas_limit <= GAS_SANITY_LIMIT`
- [reject] `timestamp != genesis_time + slot * SECONDS_PER_SLOT`
- [reject] `block_hash != parent_hash`
- [reject] Check transactions data size

And if we want to track the execution chain history (or maybe just a cache of the latest hashes and numbers?)
- [ignore] Check `parent_hash` is known
- [reject] Check `block_number == previous_block_number + 1`

Author: yeah, good call. also checking what other low-cost validations geth does today

Author: The current devp2p gossip validations can be found here -- https://github.com/ethereum/devp2p/blob/master/caps/eth.md#block-encoding-and-validity

All cheap checks should be replicated here as much as is possible. Ideally, we do not have to add a `validateHeader` call to the execution-engine. I would argue it's even okay for a "cheap" condition or two to be dropped if it is too difficult for the consensus layer to validate. The proposer signature (like the proof of work) is the most important initial validation. All others are nice-to-have

Author: > Check parent_hash is known

comes trivially from knowing and fully processing the `beacon_block` parent. Will keep that embedded in that validation.

> [reject] Check block_number == previous_block_number + 1

going to avoid adding state/cache here for now

but the type of the payload does change to the (modified) `SignedBeaconBlock` found in the Merge.
This type changes due to the addition of `execution_payload` to the inner `BeaconBlockBody`.

See the Merge [state transition document](./beacon-chain.md#beaconblockbody) for further details.

### Transitioning the gossip

See gossip transition details found in the [Altair document](../altair/p2p) for
details on how to handle transitioning gossip topics for the Merge.

## The Req/Resp domain

### Messages

#### BeaconBlocksByRange v2

**Protocol ID:** `/eth2/beacon_chain/req/beacon_blocks_by_range/2/`

Request and Response remain unchanged.

> `MERGE_FORK_VERSION` is used as an additional `context` to specify the Merge block type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Merge fork-digest is introduced to the `context` enum to specify the Merge block type.
```

Nitpick: it's the fork-digest, not the fork-version, which is used as context. And I think of the context as an `enum`, something we extend, but not have more instances of. It's not version `/3`, just a backwards-compatible change to `/2`

Author: right. I kept it as /2 but your phrasing is clearer that it is an extension of the valid values. fixed!

Per `context = compute_fork_digest(fork_version, genesis_validators_root)`:

[0]: # (eth2spec: skip)

| `fork_version`           | Chunk SSZ type             |
| ------------------------ | -------------------------- |
| `GENESIS_FORK_VERSION`   | `phase0.SignedBeaconBlock` |
| `ALTAIR_FORK_VERSION`    | `altair.SignedBeaconBlock` |
| `MERGE_FORK_VERSION`     | `merge.SignedBeaconBlock`  |

#### BeaconBlocksByRoot v2

**Protocol ID:** `/eth2/beacon_chain/req/beacon_blocks_by_root/2/`

Request and Response remain unchanged.

> `MERGE_FORK_VERSION` is used as an additional `context` to specify the Merge block type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Merge fork-digest is introduced to the `context` enum to specify the Merge block type.
```
